(0) Serial Communications Console
   This is a diagnostic program to be used with the 8051 data collection
software.  It is assumed that a sensor signal and pulse input signals are
provuded to the data collection units, and that there are two units connected
by RS-485 to the PC.  The PC must have a RS-485 card installed that is
compatible with the COM ports.  COM1 is used by the program in 9600,N,9,1 mode.

   To run this software, you must have an AT-compatible PC with a VGA-compatible
monitor.

   There are 5 buttons, each containins an entry.  The cursor's position is
marked by highlighting the button the cursor is located at in red.  The others
are marked green.  These keys will carry out cursor motion and other functions
described below:

ARROW KEYS:
   Left, Right: Moves the cursor.
   Up, Down:    Changes the entry in the current box.
OTHER KEYS:
   Enter: Activates the function indicated by current position of the cursor on
          the entry indicated in the box.  These are the possible entries:

         TEST, ABORT boxes: 1 = microprocessor unit 1.
                            2 = microprocessor unit 2.
                            * = both units.
         STATUS box:        The same, except there is no *.
         DUMP, DATA boxes:  1 to  6 = the 6 counters in unit 1.
                            7 to 12 = the 6 counters in unit 2.
   ^C: Exits the program and close the log file if it was open.
   ^F: Clears the serial communication line
   ^D: Clears out the data area.
   ^L: Opens a log file, prompts you for the file name.
       When entering the name, you can use Backspace to erase letters,
       and Escape to abort the entry.  Typing Enter will start the logging.
   Escape: Will close the log file.

(1) Command Display
   STATUS will return the following results:

            Active ... the unit addressed is in the active command mode.
            Waiting .. the unit is in a test waiting for the first sensor.
            Testing .. the unit is counting waiting for the second sensor.
            (Hexadecimal number).. a transmission error uccired.

   Neither the results of the TEST or ABORT command are directly displayed.
You can, however, use the STATUS command to get a display of the microprocessor
unit's current state.  If the unit was Active, then the TEST command will put
it in the Waiting state.  If it was in the Waiting or Testing state, then ABORT
will put it in the Active state.
   The unit's state will change from Waiting to Testing when it receives for
first sensor signal, and from Testing to Active when it receives the second.

   The DUMP command will display the successive nutation widths of the unit
selected in top-down, left-right manner on the data area of the screen.  When
and if a screen is filled, you will need to press Enter to continue the
listing.  Typing Escape will abort the listing.

   The DATA command will display a statistical summary, as received by the
unit selected, on the data area of the screen.
